GH-24868: [C++] Add a Tensor logical value type with varying dimensions, implemented using ExtensionType (#37166)
apache/arrow: docs/source/format/CanonicalExtensions.rst

  by this specification. Instead, this extension type lets one use fixed shape tensors
  as elements in a field of a RecordBatch or a Table.

.. _variable_shape_tensor_extension:

Variable shape tensor
=====================

* Extension name: `arrow.variable_shape_tensor`.

* The storage type of the extension is: ``StructArray`` where struct
  is composed of **data** and **shape** fields describing a single
  tensor per row:

  * **data** is a ``List`` holding tensor elements of a single tensor.

>     Data type of the list elements is uniform across the entire column
>     and also provided in metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Data type of the list elements is uniform across the entire column.
```

I don't think it is provided in the metadata? (and that is also not needed, since it is part of the type already)

    When logical and physical layout are equal, the permutation will always
    be ([0, 1, .., N-1]) and can therefore be left out.

  * **uniform_dimensions** = indices of dimensions whose sizes are
    guaranteed to remain constant. Indices are a subset of all possible
    dimension indices ([0, 1, .., N-1]).
    The uniform dimensions must still be represented in the `shape` field,
    and must always be the same value for all tensors in the array -- this
    allows code to interpret the tensor correctly without accounting for
    uniform dimensions while still permitting optional optimizations that
    take advantage of the uniformity. uniform_dimensions can be left out,
    in which case it is assumed that all dimensions might be variable.

  * **uniform_shape** = shape over dimensions that are guaranteed to stay
    constant over of all tensors in the array if all their ragged dimension
    sizes were replaced by 0.
    An array containing tensor with shape (2, 3, 4) and uniform dimensions
    (0, 2) would have uniform shape (2, 0, 4).

* Description of the serialization:

  The metadata must be a valid JSON object including number of

>   dimensions of the contained tensors as an integer with key **"ndim"**

Reviewer: Is this `ndim` needed? (you can infer it from the storage type, although it might be practical to include) 
If we keep it, I would also give a concrete example of minimal metadata as the first example in the list just below.

Author: It's not needed and I'd omit it for now. I'll add a minimal example.

Author: Changed.

  by this specification. Instead, this extension type lets one use fixed shape tensors
  as elements in a field of a RecordBatch or a Table.

.. _variable_shape_tensor_extension:

Variable shape tensor
=====================

* Extension name: `arrow.variable_shape_tensor`.

* The storage type of the extension is: ``StructArray`` where struct
  is composed of **data** and **shape** fields describing a single
  tensor per row:

>   * **data** is a ``List`` holding tensor elements of a single tensor.
>     Data type of the list elements is uniform across the entire column.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **data** is a ``List`` holding tensor elements (each list element is
    a single tensor). The List's value type is the value type of the tensor,
    such as an integer or floating-point type.
```

    guaranteed to stay constant in uniform dimensions and can vary in
    non-uniform dimensions. This holds over all tensors in the array.
    Sizes in uniform dimensions are represented with int32 values, while
    sizes of the non-uniform dimensions are not known in advance and are
    represented with 0s. If ``uniform_shape`` is not provided it is assumed
    that all dimensions are non-uniform.
    An array containing a tensor with shape (2, 3, 4) and whose first and
    last dimensions are uniform would have ``uniform_shape`` (2, 0, 4).
    This allows for interpreting the tensor correctly without accounting for
    uniform dimensions while still permitting optional optimizations that
    take advantage of the uniformity.

* Description of the serialization:

  The metadata must be a valid JSON object that optionally includes
  dimension names with keys **"dim_names"** and  ordering of dimensions
  with key **"permutation"**.
  Shapes of tensors can be defined in a subset of dimensions by providing
  key **"uniform_shape"**.
  Minimal metadata is an empty JSON object.

  - Example of minimal metadata is:

    ``{}``

>   - Example with ``dim_names`` metadata for NCHW ordered data:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Example with ``dim_names`` metadata for NCHW ordered data (note that the first
    logical dimension, ``N``, is mapped to the **data** List array: each element in the List
    is a CHW tensor and the List of tensors implicitly constitutes a single NCHW tensor):
```

    ``{ "dim_names": ["C", "H", "W"] }``

>   - Example with ``uniform_shape`` metadata for a set of color images
>     with variable width:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Example with ``uniform_shape`` metadata for a set of color images
    with fixed height, variable width and three color channels:
```

    ``{ "dim_names": ["H", "W", "C"], "uniform_shape": [400, 0, 3] }``

  - Example of permuted 3-dimensional tensor:

    ``{ "permutation": [2, 0, 1] }``

>     This is the physical layout shape and the shape of the logical
>     layout would given an individual tensor of shape [100, 200, 500]
>     be ``[500, 100, 200]``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For example, if the physical **shape** of an individual tensor
    is ``[100, 200, 500]``, this permutation would denote a logical shape
    of ``[500, 100, 200]``.
```

.. note::

  With the exception of ``permutation``, the parameters and storage
  of VariableShapeTensor relate to the *physical* storage of the tensor.

>   For example, consider a tensor with:

Reviewer 2: Nit: markup for a code block
```suggestion
  For example, consider a tensor with::
```

    shape = [10, 20, 30]
    dim_names = [x, y, z]
    permutations = [2, 0, 1]

  This means the logical tensor has names [z, x, y] and shape [30, 10, 20].

>   Elements in a variable shape tensor extension array are stored
>   in row-major/C-contiguous order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note::
   Values inside each **data** tensor element are stored in row-major/C-contiguous
   order according to the corresponding **shape**.
```

  by this specification. Instead, this extension type lets one use fixed shape tensors
  as elements in a field of a RecordBatch or a Table.

.. _variable_shape_tensor_extension:

Variable shape tensor
=====================

* Extension name: `arrow.variable_shape_tensor`.

* The storage type of the extension is: ``StructArray`` where struct
  is composed of **data** and **shape** fields describing a single
  tensor per row:

  * **data** is a ``List`` holding tensor elements of a single tensor.
    Data type of the list elements is uniform across the entire column.

>   * **shape** is a ``FixedSizeList<uint32>[ndim]`` of the tensor shape where

Reviewer 2: I have not followed this, but was there any discussion of signed vs. unsigned here? Most of the Arrow spec uses signed integers even for numbers that are always positive (and unless your tensors are huge I'm not sure having one less bit to represent the shape's dimensions is a problem?).

Author: I don't think this was discussed and indeed `int64` would be more consistent, will change.

Reviewer: I think `int32` is also fine (just not `uint32`)? (we have other places where we used int32 by default for positive integers, eg the offsets)

    tensor.

* Extension type parameters:

  * **value_type** = the Arrow data type of individual tensor elements.

  Optional parameters describing the logical layout:

  * **dim_names** = explicit names to tensor dimensions
    as an array. The length of it should be equal to the shape
    length and equal to the number of dimensions.

    ``dim_names`` can be used if the dimensions have well-known
    names and they map to the physical layout (row-major).

  * **permutation**  = indices of the desired ordering of the
    original dimensions, defined as an array.

    The indices contain a permutation of the values [0, 1, .., N-1] where
    N is the number of dimensions. The permutation indicates which
    dimension of the logical layout corresponds to which dimension of the
    physical tensor (the i-th dimension of the logical view corresponds
    to the dimension with number ``permutations[i]`` of the physical tensor).

    Permutation can be useful in case the logical order of
    the tensor is a permutation of the physical order (row-major).

    When logical and physical layout are equal, the permutation will always
    be ([0, 1, .., N-1]) and can therefore be left out.

>   * **uniform_dimensions** = indices of dimensions whose sizes are

Reviewer 2: Here and below, clarify what happens if `uniform_dimensions` / `uniform_shape` is absent?

Author: Added in `uniform_shape`.

    guaranteed to remain constant. Indices are a subset of all possible
    dimension indices ([0, 1, .., N-1]).
    The uniform dimensions must still be represented in the `shape` field,
    and must always be the same value for all tensors in the array -- this
    allows code to interpret the tensor correctly without accounting for
    uniform dimensions while still permitting optional optimizations that
    take advantage of the uniformity. uniform_dimensions can be left out,
    in which case it is assumed that all dimensions might be variable.

  * **uniform_shape** = shape of the dimensions that are guaranteed to stay

>     constant over all tensors in the array, with the shape of the ragged dimensions

Reviewer 2: The term "ragged" always feels obscure to me, how about "non-uniform"?

Author: Since pytorch uses "jagged" and "tensorflow" ragged we might as well use "non-uniform" :D.
However the current text is being voted on, so if we change this we should probably communicate to the mailing list?

Reviewer 2: If they are just wording details then we don't need to inform the ML, IMHO.
However, if we make any semantic changes (such as the ``uniform_dimensions`` questions below), then it would need mentioning on the ML.

    set to 0.
    An array containing tensor with shape (2, 3, 4) and uniform dimensions
    (0, 2) would have uniform shape (2, 0, 4).

* Description of the serialization:

  The metadata must be a valid JSON object, that optionally includes
  dimension names with keys **"dim_names"**, ordering of
  dimensions with key **"permutation"**, indices of dimensions whose sizes
  are guaranteed to remain constant with key **"uniform_dimensions"** and
  shape of those dimensions with key **"uniform_shape"**.
  Minimal metadata is an empty JSON object.

  - Example of minimal metadata is:

    ``{}``

  - Example with ``dim_names`` metadata for NCHW ordered data:

    ``{ "dim_names": ["C", "H", "W"] }``

  - Example with ``uniform_dimensions`` metadata for a set of color images

>     with variable width:

Reviewer 2: Is it legal to pass `uniform_dimensions` but `uniform_shape`?

Come to think of it, perhaps we don't need two separate metadata members? For example, an absent `uniform_shape` would mean all dimensions are non-uniform. While a `null` entry in a present `uniform_shape` would point to a non-uniform dimension?

Author: Indeed `uniform_dimensions` is a "weaker" version of `uniform_shape` information. We could have a case where we know dimensions of images won't change, but we don't know the shape until runtime. Could the information that dimension is uniform still be used for optimization at runtime? I imagine no. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: I have no idea. Perhaps potential users of this type do? :-)

    ``{ "dim_names": ["H", "W", "C"], "uniform_dimensions": [1] }``

  - Example of permuted 3-dimensional tensor:

    ``{ "permutation": [2, 0, 1] }``

    This is the physical layout shape and the shape of the logical
    layout would given an individual tensor of shape [100, 200, 500]
    be ``[500, 100, 200]``.

.. note::

>   With the exception of permutation all other parameters and storage
>   of VariableShapeTensor define the *physical* storage of the tensor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  With the exception of ``permutation``, the parameters and storage
  of VariableShapeTensor relate to the *physical* storage of the tensor.
```

    names and they map to the physical layout (row-major).

  * **permutation**  = indices of the desired ordering of the
    original dimensions, defined as an array.

    The indices contain a permutation of the values [0, 1, .., N-1] where
    N is the number of dimensions. The permutation indicates which
    dimension of the logical layout corresponds to which dimension of the
    physical tensor (the i-th dimension of the logical view corresponds
    to the dimension with number ``permutations[i]`` of the physical tensor).

    Permutation can be useful in case the logical order of
    the tensor is a permutation of the physical order (row-major).

    When logical and physical layout are equal, the permutation will always
    be ([0, 1, .., N-1]) and can therefore be left out.

  * **uniform_shape** = sizes of individual tensors dimensions are
    guaranteed to stay constant in uniform dimensions and can vary in
    non-uniform dimensions. This holds over all tensors in the array.
    Sizes in uniform dimensions are represented with int32 values, while
    sizes of the non-uniform dimensions are not known in advance and are

>     represented with 0s. If ``uniform_shape`` is not provided it is assumed

Reviewer 2: Or JSON supports `null` which maps quite naturally to what we are trying to express, IMHO.

>     represented with 0s. If ``uniform_shape`` is not provided it is assumed

Author: Switched language to `null`.

    that all dimensions are non-uniform.
    An array containing a tensor with shape (2, 3, 4) and whose first and
    last dimensions are uniform would have ``uniform_shape`` (2, null, 4).
    This allows for interpreting the tensor correctly without accounting for
    uniform dimensions while still permitting optional optimizations that
    take advantage of the uniformity.

* Description of the serialization:

  The metadata must be a valid JSON object that optionally includes
  dimension names with keys **"dim_names"** and  ordering of dimensions
  with key **"permutation"**.
  Shapes of tensors can be defined in a subset of dimensions by providing
  key **"uniform_shape"**.
  Minimal metadata is an empty JSON object.

  - Example of minimal metadata is:

>     ``{}``

Reviewer: Sorry, one more small nitpick: the minimal metadata is actually _no_ metadata, which is typically represented as an empty string (I am actually not fully sure if in this case the metadata key could also just not be present in the field metadata), instead of an empty json dict (I don't think we should necessarily recommend using an empty dict)

Author: That's a fair point! Empty string feels like the safer choice here. See my suggested change below.

>   Minimal metadata is an empty JSON object.
> 
>   - Example of minimal metadata is:
> 
>     ``{}``

Author: ```suggestion
  Minimal metadata is an empty string.

  - In case of minimal metadata we assume that all dimensions are non-uniform
    and the ordering of dimensions is the same as the physical layout.
    Shape of individual tensors is given by ``shape`` ``FixedSizeList<int32>[ndim]`` 
    field which also implies number of dimensions with its length ``ndim``.
```

Author: @jorisvandenbossche feel free to accept this suggestion or alter it.
22 @pitrou

Author: Ping @jorisvandenbossche

Reviewer: Personally I would say this paragraph is a bit superfluous, because that all follows from the main spec logically and from those parameters being optional?

Author: I suppose so. So how about just:
```suggestion
  Minimal metadata is an empty string.
```

  by this specification. Instead, this extension type lets one use fixed shape tensors
  as elements in a field of a RecordBatch or a Table.

.. _variable_shape_tensor_extension:

Variable shape tensor
=====================

* Extension name: `arrow.variable_shape_tensor`.

* The storage type of the extension is: ``StructArray`` where struct
  is composed of **data** and **shape** fields describing a single
  tensor per row:

  * **data** is a ``List`` holding tensor elements of a single tensor.
    Data type of the list elements is uniform across the entire column
    and also provided in metadata.
  * **shape** is a ``FixedSizeList`` of the tensor shape where
    the size of the list is equal to the number of dimensions of the

>     tensor.

Reviewer 3: FixedSizeList of what?  Int32?  Int16?  Any integer type?

Author: Indeed! Changed to:
```rst
  * **shape** is a ``FixedSizeList<uint32>[ndim]`` of the tensor shape where
    the size of the list ``ndim`` is equal to the number of dimensions of the
    tensor.
```

* Extension type parameters:

  * **value_type** = the Arrow data type of individual tensor elements.
  * **ndim** = the number of dimensions of the tensor.

  Optional parameters describing the logical layout:

  * **dim_names** = same as `arrow.fixed_shape_tensor`

  * **permutation** = same as in `arrow.fixed_shape_tensor`

* Description of the serialization:

  The metadata must be a valid JSON object including number of
  dimensions of the contained tensors as an integer with key **"ndim"**
  plus optional dimension names with keys **"dim_names"** and ordering of
  the dimensions with key **"permutation"**.

  - Example: ``{ "ndim": 2}``
  - Example with ``dim_names`` metadata for NCHW ordered data:

    ``{ "ndim": 3, "dim_names": ["C", "H", "W"]}``

  - Example of permuted 3-dimensional tensor:

    ``{ "ndim": 3, "permutation": [2, 0, 1]}``

    This is the physical layout shape and the shape of the logical
    layout would given an individual tensor of shape [100, 200, 500]

>     be ``[500, 100, 200]``.

Reviewer 3: The way the description for this type (and for the fixed size tensor type actually) reads it makes it seem like there should be a `value_type` parameter in the JSON.  However, I think this parameter is actually expressed by the choice of storage type right?  E.g. if the storage type is `struct<data: List<Float64>, shape: FixedSizeList<3>>` then one can infer that the `value_type` is `Float64`.

However, couldn't you also infer that `ndim` is 3?

Author: Good point! `ndim` is provided by storage type and serializing `ndim` would be redundant. I'll refactor it out of JSON.

  by this specification. Instead, this extension type lets one use fixed shape tensors
  as elements in a field of a RecordBatch or a Table.

.. _variable_shape_tensor_extension:

Variable shape tensor
=====================

* Extension name: `arrow.variable_shape_tensor`.

* The storage type of the extension is: ``StructArray`` where struct
  is composed of **data** and **shape** fields describing a single
  tensor per row:

  * **data** is a ``List`` holding tensor elements of a single tensor.
    Data type of the list elements is uniform across the entire column
    and also provided in metadata.
  * **shape** is a ``FixedSizeList<uint32>[ndim]`` of the tensor shape where
    the size of the list ``ndim`` is equal to the number of dimensions of the

>     tensor.

Author: Are you saying you get `ndim` at query time and expect `ndim=const` over the entire array or are you saying that every row will potentially have different `ndim`? If latter is the case we could use storage:
```cpp
struct_({field("shape", list(uint32())), field("data", list(value_type))})
```
That would work if we can assume consistent memory layout (e.g. always row major). However if we want to allow for other memory layouts then we also need to store per row permutation or strides.
